Liberation 

For many who are attempting to understand what the state of "rigpa" means in Dzogchen, let me share a few words that may clarify: The purpose of the Dzogchen teachings is to help people to discover their true nature. At a certain time for various reasons, a clear and certain realization of that "true nature" will occur. In Zen they call that "satori" or "kensho". In Dzogchen and Essence Mahamudra we call that wisdom moment of realization "rigpa". Its a state of gnosis or wisdom that erupts suddenly into consciousness. 

It is NOT just a very clear and profound "here and now" awareness devoid of dualistic mind. The authentic moment is suffused with a new non-conceptual perspective that is more like shifting from seeing the view from the bottom of a mountain to suddenly seeing the full panorama from the mountain peak. Its a bit "breath taking" at first. Its a different way of seeing not some new knowledge or information. The field of experience is "seen" and known differently. 

What does this new vista appear like?

First of all, the entire sense of presence is one of transparency, almost like being an open window without a window frame. The body seems transparent, especially the area of the head. The "outer" dimension is fully manifesting as usual but somehow inseparable from the presence of total transparency, empty of solidity and more like a field of colorful consciousness. The Buddhist phrase of "emptiness is form and form is emptiness" is fully understood and experienced for the first time. Its seems so obvious now. The entire dimension is more like a 3D hologram floating in a space of total consciousness.

"Po pierwsze, całkowite wrażenie obecności jest jednym z przejrzystością, prawie jak bycie otwartym oknem bez ramy okiennej. Ciało wydaje się przejrzyste, szczególnie głowa. "Zewnętrzny" wymiar jak zwykle manifestuje się w całości ale bez oddzielenia od obecności całkowitej przejrzystości, pustki solidności a bardziej jako pole kolorowej świadomości. Buddyjskie powiedzenie "pustka jest formą a forma jest pustką" jest pierwszy raz w pełni rozumiane i doświadczane. Wydaje się to teraz tak oczywiste. Cały wymiar jest bardziej jak unoszący się w przestrzeni całkowitej świadomości hologram 3D." 


You recognize that "you" are this total field of consciousness that can't be considered to be any one thing as existing nor as anything as not existing, but right in the middle between existing and not-existing, as the freedom from the extremes of separate and independently existing "things" and "selves" and the total non-existence of all things and selves. And this can't be conceptualized, as its a completely non-conceptual knowing, yet is vividly obvious.

The state of "certainty" of self-being beyond all descriptions is completely penetrating and obvious as well.

So when authentic "rigpa" arises as just described it may be very profound in future moments or just very natural and ordinary, but never missing the essential fragrance of the transparent and empty nature of self-presence. Having known the authentic nature of reality, one simply rests in the state of knowing presence and continues in total spontaneity. 

Most people don't "see" or experience reality this way, not even most practitioners of Dzogchen or other similar approaches. The reason is because their practice and insights are too shallow. The most common error is substituting a very clear and profound intellectual insight for "rigpa" and then trying to "remember" that conceptual view again and again. What is really needed is a "shift" in the contracted energy state that produces the dimming or dullness of clarity that prevents real "seeing". Conceptualizing and intellectual insight only clarifies the "thought" aspect on the most superficial level of energy and actually blocks the spontaneous wisdom from arising naturally. The mind needs to be in a "topic free" condition in order for this enlightening wisdom to arise.

There is a dimensionless point of "awareness-wisdom-consciousness" that resides in the center of the crown chakra in our skull. It is what we call our personal and individual "point of view" or consciousness. Its a point of pure emptiness that is surrounded by its various fields of energy emanation. When it is in a contracted state it experiences its field of perception as being "solid" and made up of separate "things". When its not contracted upon itself it experiences its field as a vast colorful dimension of transparent consciousness without borders or limits... just as I described "rigpa" above. It is this empty point of awareness that experiences "rigpa" or not. It is a point of pure Consciousness.

In kundalini yoga and other tantric systems of India and Tibet, they describe this point of pure consciousness as being enfolded within a lotus flower, where the petals are folded over the central point of consciousness in the center. The purpose of energy practices is to trigger the "petals" of the crown chakra to open fully which reveals the center point of pure consciousness in the center. When this occurs the state of "rigpa" is obvious and not needed to be produced by some "understanding". We are blocking our own state of "rigpa" by the our contracted state that locks us solidly within our web or cocoon of thoughts and mental energy. 

Its interesting that whenever rigpa arises it feels like the top of the head is wide open to the sky and the solidity of the skull has become transparent. If this isn't one's inner experience, I would question the depth of the state. There is an undeniable "vastness" and "openness" present in every moment of rigpa as well as the tone of sheer delight. 

In the appendix of my book I share the instructions for triggering this "opening" event to occur. For some just receiving the "pointing out" instructions from a teacher of Dzogchen or Mahamudra is sufficient to bring this "crown chakra" opening to occur without any meditation or energy yoga practice. But only very few have a deep experience from the pointing out method alone, yet the "pointing out" is vital in triggering the inner transformations that will eventually develop.

For most, if not all, I recommend taking a look at the energy practices that do produce profound insights and "opening" swiftly... Once you "see" all this for yourself, then you can share this with others as well.

I have one of the "recognition" exercises posted on my website that can be a good starting point... www.wayoflight.net


https://www.facebook.com/groups/137617126381879/permalink/330323610444562/


